I’ll talk to you about the Right Side,
Right Side sympathetic nervous system,
which is expressed by our subtle energy
of Mahasaraswati,
which gives us the power to act.
By [the] Left Side we desire
and by using the Right Side, the power
of Pingala Nadi, we act.
I was telling you about the Right Side
the other day.
Let us see how our Right Side is built up.
I am sorry for people who have come
for the first time
but every time when I start the introduction
to the subject,
again it becomes the same but later on
I’ll explain to you about Sahaj Yoga.
Now this Right Side, Pingala Nadi, is a
very, very important energy-giving energy
which makes us act and activate.
Now this one is made of all the five
elements:
you know all the five elements that have
created
our physical being and our mental being.
That’s how it helps us to work out all
our physical and mental problems,
mental activities and mental and physical
growth.
Now this, being made by those five
elements,
when, first time, human beings started
thinking
of doing some action, about anything,
say in India,
they first thought, “Why not, somehow
or other,
reach to the principle of these elements,
which is beyond physics, which is beyond
chemistry?”
And to reach to that point,
they thought it would be better if we try
to invoke
or to awaken the Deities which are
governing those five elements.
This was a very big mistake though,
I should say,
because human beings, whatever they
take up,
they do not know where to stop!
If you tell them that you have to clean
your teeth every day,
then they’ll go on cleaning it twelve times
in twelve hours.
[If] you tell them anything, they’ll go
so far
that they will destroy the instrument which
is supposed to be looked after.
That’s the nature of human beings: they
cannot have brakes to themselves.
They do not have common sense as far as
balancing their life.
So, anything you give them, they become
so mad after it
that, in Marathi, there’s a word
that [means that] they ultimately put ashes
on their head,
to say, to declare that, “I am dead now,
I have become ashes.”
Like that, they get so frantic
that even while doing this awakening
of these principles
they forgot, lost their sight,
that we are after all Spirit and not
these elements.
We are beyond that, we have to reach beyond
that.
All these elements are only useful for us
to achieve a state in which we can create
things
and we can have more time to devote
to meditation to enjoy our Self-realisation.
They got completely blinded by the advances
they made on this side
which is, in pure and simple words,
materialism.
They became so responsible, so efficient.
First in the Vedas, it’s written, the first
stanza is such that,
“By reading these Vedas if you do not know
your Spirit then it is absolutely useless.”
But this stanza they always close down
I think.
Then they started worshipping those
Deities, this, that,
exciting them and doing all ritualism
and all that.
And they just went into it headlong,
absolutely headlong.
They would not turn back.
So by exciting these elements,
they discovered the principles of these
elements;
for example, they discovered that gravity
is the essence of the Mother Earth.
But [actually] it is not.
That is not the essence of the Mother
Earth,
that is the energy that is asserted by Her,
but Her essence is Her fragrance.
They could not cross that limit where they
could see really the subtle thing
which was [that] the subtle principle
of this energy
of gravity is the fragrance.
All the fragrances come from Her.
Of course man-made [fragrances] there are,
that’s different,
but even the man-made are also coming
from Her,
if you go, trace, source it up to the point,
it is from there.
Like that they went on discovering
the subtler, so-called subtler, energies
or the principles of these elements, from
the Vedas time.
Then it became the science.
People started studying physics, chemistry,
this, that:
understanding what was there before them
by going into it and trying to find out
what is it made of.
For example, they went into atoms,
they went into molecules and things and
they tried to find out.
And there they find the oscillation
of the protons
and they find the oscillation of these
atoms  [and] they just can’t understand,
“Now, from where this energy of this
oscillation is coming?”
They could not capture that energy so they
thought,
“Better use the energy.” So they started
using the energy.
Now it has gone to such a limit of the
whole thing is,
now I read, saw that, microchips or
something coming up.
After some time you won’t be using (your)
hands or head or anything,
it will be that microchips will be going
on.
But with this kind of a thing, with this
extreme behaviour,
you will become a machine yourself, a slave
of the machine.
Today the petrol is exhausted, tomorrow
electricity is exhausted,
then what are you going to do? You don’t
know even to count two plus two!
So you are left without any counting.
You will become the same primitive man
and I don’t know what you will be doing,
climbing on the trees and living like
monkeys?
I don’t know what will happen.
So all this advancement that you did has
gone too far.
But as a result of too much efficiency,
too much responsibility and all that,
you became sort of addicted to it
and then, with that, you started dominating
other people.
The machinery came in; with that you
produced such a lot of machinery stuff
that you didn’t know what to do, so you had
to find out
markets where you’ll sell them, so you
started
capturing other markets where you started
selling them
and that’s how all these economic problems
and all these have started.
There are developing countries, there are
developed countries,
all things going on in this mad world.
All right!
But we reach a point now where we realise
that this machine has done something
nonsensical within us.
When we reach that point,
we start thinking, “Now, what are we
to do?”
We have been very responsible,
not you people but your forefathers maybe,
who went to fight the whole world and do
this
and they had to be at right time at right
places and do all sorts of things.
By that over-responsibility you became
sort of fed up.
You just didn’t know what to do. For
example, morning you wear a grey suit,
in the night you have to wear a tailcoat
and then if you have to drink your wine,
you have to take a separate glass;
or for that, this.
It became too much messy, [so] you said,
“Throw them in the sea!
We’re not going to have all this nonsense.
We have collected all these forms
and horrible things that have made us
so rigid.”
That’s how you tried to throw away
everything.
But even then when you throw away, where
do you go?
I mean you have to exist, you cannot just
hang in the air.
So you said now take another style.
And the another style is even worse, much
worse.
Because then: no responsibility, no
respect, no understanding.
So this power goes absolutely zero and you
are tired very soon.
I have seen, I mean in the BBC and all
that, young people,
and I am a very old woman compared to them,
after saying two three words, “Haahh!”
they go down.
Again after saying something, “Haahh!”
This is very big acting these days!
In any play you see a person says, “Haahh!”
What does it take to act for this kind
of a thing?
This is what is very common now, you
notice it.
The reason is you are tired, you are
absolutely tired. Why?
Because your brain is the same old brain
and you have taken a new life, and you
cannot adjust yourself to that.
You say that, “Now I am sitting down,
doing nothing.
I am not going to be efficient anymore and
all that, I’m sitting down,”
[but] the brain is going, “chuk, chuk,
chuk, chuk, chuk, chuk, chuk, chuk,”
morning till evening. How to stop this
brain?
This brain is working so hard, using up all
your energy
[so] you have no strength.
So to counteract you will say, “Let’s take
to some sort of a thing
by which we go out of this madness.”
Let’s take to something
that takes you [to], as we call it,
the Right or the Left Side,
take something like say hasheesh,
or something  —
like another thing they took — LSD, to go
to the right or to the left.
Now what happens with that you know
very well.
Now, thank God, you have realised also
that that was nonsensical also,
that was no good. These are two areas
within us
which are called as Adi Bhautik and
Adi Daivik.
Now, the Adi Bhautik are the ones which
take you
to the Left Side is the subconscious.
And the Adi Daivik are the ones where you
try to invoke the devas
and all that on the right hand side,
that one is the Adi Daivik where we call it
supra-conscious area.
These two are of no use to human beings,
actually.
They are not meant for you. They are meant
for people who are dead,
who are dead souls, who are good
for nothing.
Now, they cannot get Realisation.
It’s not meant for you. That’s the area
you should not reside in.
But you enter into these areas because
of extreme natures.
Some people by going into these drugs,
some [by] taking to some sort of movements
like mesmerism, spiritualism and all sorts
of isms.
Some people onto the right hand side like
taking to
what you call these people who are
racialists
and all such organisations which are
racialist and this and that
and you know all that kind of a people,
like Hitlerish type.
All this is nothing but is a kind of
an intoxicant
which makes you forget the reality that you
are a human being,
that you have to become the Spirit. That
you are the Spirit is the reality.
Now the present trend in the Western life
is very much set
in this country, about which I am very
much concerned.
I have talked about [this] to many people
in person, and also otherwise,
that the quality of mind —
because we are with the English, let’s
talk about the English people —
quality of mind of English is excellent,
I have said it always.
And the young people of England have
a very good quality of mind,
but their heart is like this.
They are frightened of what? God alone
knows, but they are frightened.
Or they have taken this course? I don’t
know.
Now to do any work, also they are
frightened.
Supposing we put this colour then it may
not match:
[if] it doesn’t match it doesn’t matter.
What does it matter?
Because of those previous ideas they are
so frightened of doing anything.
Though they say they have broken all
those ideas
and they have taken to a new liberated
ways and all that.
But this liberation is also another madness
in which their fear has not gone.
So the quality of mind
of we the English Sahaja Yogis and English
people is excellent.
If you talk to them you will think you are
talking to a scholar;
I mean no less than Shakespeare!
They could be very well read.
They will know about anything you ask them,
“What is this road?”
“This is the road!” “Now, what’s the name
of this road?” “This is the gentleman.”
Who was he, his grandfather, what he did,
what was the gossip about him, scandals,
everything!
You can get everything from them. They
know everything about everything.
Sometimes I am amazed the way people know
about things,
about all the details as to how many women
he had,
and how many wives he divorced and what
he did
and where he went and what he wrote.
Take anyone!
Take a writer, or take an artist, take
a hooligan, or take a robber
or anyone who has appeared on
the newspaper.
As if they have drunk all the newspaper
into their memory.
The whole thing is so clear cut in their
mind that it’s sometimes amazing.
But if you tell them to fix one chair,
never trust that chair!
Never trust it!
If you ask them to do anything, they’ll
tell you,
“All right, tomorrow at 7 sharp, I’ll be
there!”
Even if he comes after seven days, thank
your [lucky] stars!
I have known people who have done this
to me
[and] now it’s four years, I have never
seen their faces again.
They are supposed to be XYZ from Oxford
and ABCD from Cambridge.
They have got first class first and this
and that
[but] if you go into their rooms, you will
find it’s a pigsty!
You don’t know where you have landed.
I mean, you don’t believe that it belongs
to any educated person!
There’s no sense of responsibility left
in their head.
I mean this energy that is working
in the head,
if it is not put into a responsible
channel,
[then it’s] no wonder we find every third
person is a paranoid:
something wrong with the brain.
What is wrong with the brain is that
so much energy is here
and you are not channelising it at all!
By what ways are we to channelise it?
Even after realisation, I find people have
no respect for anything.
Sometimes it’s most surprising that wit
all this brain activity going on,
they get all the satisfaction from
the Spirit,
they are raising the Kundalini and all
that,
but they have lost that capacity to be
responsible.
And that’s why, in Sahaja Yoga also, they
are not responsible.
This goes on not only about their own
private work
but about Sahaja Yoga, about everything.
So this quality of mind has no heart.
It has heart in nothing!
Supposing I am telling you something: I
don’t know about Sahaja Yogis as such,
but now I have seen with people,
[if] you give them a lecture for one year,
one hour, it’s lost, finished!
They are just the same! What has happened?
It’s only the vibrations, it’s only how you
work it out
that the life changes and all that.
But as far as they are concerned, nothing
is recorded in the memory.
Sometimes I feel how do I talk? Is it
too much on their heads
or below their feet? Where is it flowing?
So the reason is that the heart is not
there.
If you register it through your heart, you
will do it.
If you put your heart into things, you will
do it.
The heart is, as I told you, is chicken-
hearted,
is absolutely chicken-hearted.
And that’s why, this is what is lacking in
our character.
For that now the stage has reached
[that] we have to raise our Right Side, not
the Left Side.
Our Right Side is absolutely finished
and there the leader of the Right Side are
two persons.
The Deities are two persons.
Of course Brahmadeva is the one who
is The Creator,
who has created this Universe and who
is The One who is busy
still creating and doing lots of things
for you people.
But I would suggest that you have to pay
attention
to two ideals we had in the history,
for this, to understand what sort of ideals
we should have.
Because the Right Side is a Rajoguna
is the one by which you become majestic,
you become royal,
you achieve all the Rajoguna as you know
that.
Now two persons are really to be followed
in this.
One of them is Shri Ram.
Shri Ram resides on the Right Heart and
is the Father.
He is the Father and He is the fatherhood.
He is the one who came on this Earth
to teach us
how to be a father as a king.
He is a Father King, He is a Benevolent
King,
which was described before by Plato.
He is the Benevolent King.
He was the ideal that came on this Earth
to teach us
how to be responsible to others, how
to respect others,
how to understand the feelings of others.
To such an extent He went, that He had
to sacrifice
His own wife for the sake of His own state.
He did that and He had to ask His wife
who was pregnant
to go and live with a very great sage.
One may say that, “What was He doing
about His wife?”
She was the Goddess.
She was so remarkable that He was not
bothered about Her.
He was so sure of Her powers that He
did it.
And there is nothing wrong in leaving
things to the Goddess to do,
instead of meddling with Her all the time.
But this gentleman, Shri Rama, understood
the responsibility of a king
and that responsibility is lacking in us:
that responsibility towards ourselves and
towards others.
It is very, very surprising. I mean, I came
from India.
I had never met Englishmen at this close
quarters
till I came to England, I should say,
because before that all we met was
missionaries.
All missionaries were terribly responsible
for converting all the people into
Christianity.
They would get up early in the morning,
take their Bible,
go around to all the places, clean all
the dirty lanes
and clean all the children like Pickwick
Papers, you see!
Clean all the dirty people there, kiss them
and do all the impressive things to convert
the people.
They would go even to the forest to convert
them.
They were so responsible about it and they
felt they have to do it,
this is God’s job, they are doing God’s
job, they must convert.
And they went on with this and that’s how,
some of the people I met.
Then the rulers were extremely responsible.
They were ruthless and they thought this
was the greatest thing they were doing,
was to spread British Raj and that was
their responsibility.
When it comes to spreading God’s Raj
we are not.
First of all in our own life, we should
see, “Are we responsible?”
Now, in the modern time, I find
that we have got rid of that sense
of responsibility.
It’s called as a sense of diminishing
responsibility.
We’ll just say, “Yes, yes, I know.
I shouldn’t. I know, I know.”
I can’t understand: if you have a heart,
how can you say that
“I know I should not have done it”? “I know
I should have been this.”
The reason is, there is no heart and
the heart always catches
when your Right Side over acts.
That means your brain is acting too much
and there is no real action, the output
of it.
You think too much and do not put it
to practice.
“I should have gone,” “I should have
done this,”
“I should have said so.” And this is
the problem with our Right Side.
Now, among our Sahaja Yogis also, I find
people have the problem of the Right Side.
To worship the Right Side, we have to see
to Shri Ram:
How He felt responsible for the whole
world,
how He used to look after people,
how He looked after the things of other
people,
how He behaved towards other people.
That’s a very important thing which we
have to learn.
But I find people coming, if it is somebody
else’s, they’ll throw away.
They will just jump into something and
say that,
“All right, this is my house, I just settle
down here the way I like.”
There’s no sense of responsibility at all
about it,
that you have come to somebody else’s
house,
you have to have some care about it.
In the same way you have to know you have
come in the world of God,
this is the Kingdom of God where you have
entered.
You have been a stranger. Today you are
a guest in His house,
what are you doing about it?
How are you behaving? Are you responsible?
Are you like Shri Rama who took upon
Himself
all the problems of the world and still He
was so responsible?
He would not do anything even this much
to disturb a person.
As far as possible He would like to try
to console,
and to have the formalities of good living.
Formality is meant for good living and
good understanding.
Unless and until you have this sense
of responsibility,
your collectivity cannot be all right.
You cannot be collectively all right.
You need not be a machine for that.
There is no need to be a machine,
like Japanese — only one person says,
the another doesn’t talk.
But this one kind of a funny individualism
that you have got
will never give you that collectivity that
is expected of Sahaj Yogis.
We all have to be one, being responsible
for each other.
Not only for one or two persons, because
he is my friend,
he is my husband, she is my wife but
for all of us.
We have to be responsible for them,
for their things, for their children,
for their house, for everything. We have
to be responsible.
And if this sense of responsibility is
lacking,
how will you have responsibility for your
Self-realisation?
Only it can be a self-centred thing,
thinking that,
“I am very much better, my powers are
better. I must have more powers.”
But if you do not have this sense
of responsibility
why should God also give you powers?
The main thing is, your Right Side is
completely weakened,
that is the Surya Nadi, that is the nadi
which is called as the nadi
by which people hold their prana. So it
gives you the pranashakti.
It’s the pranashakti within you which is
the vital force of energy within you,
which is lacking. Now this lacking is added
up by your heart.
At least for a man like that whose
pranashakti is exhausted.
At least for such a man if the heart is
there,
he can really use that power which is
accumulating in the head
and exhausting him, like eating up
his brain,
if he has the heart in him.
Now this is what I have told you last time
that the Right Side of human beings
is very important
when it comes to Sahaj Yoga.
Because, when the Kundalini rises,
your Right Side is also, Right Side is also
awakened.
Now the question is: why Sahaja Yoga does
not spread in England so fast?
Is a very good question many people have
asked me.
While in Australia it spreads so fast.
The reason is the Right Side is missing.
For the Right Side to be awakened
first of all there should be some Right
Side!
If there is no Right Side, what do you
awaken?
If there is no light at all what are you
going to awaken?
There has to be a lamp to be awakened.
So all these topics and talks that we have
in the society,
“I know! I know!” and then you ask them
they just say, “I don’t know!”
“How are you?” Like that. All these accents
and all that, one should give up.
One should know that you have to be
responsible:
that’s a very, very important thing
of life.
I personally think, unless and until you
feel that responsibility,
that heart into Sahaja Yoga, you will enjoy
just my talk
as you would just enjoy anything else.
Real enjoyment comes when your Spirit
really blows out the vibrations.
You are taking my vibrations, all right, you
are feeling them, but what about yours?
Are you blowing your vibrations out or they
are just eating your brain?
Simple questions is, are you blowing any
vibrations outside?
We have some Sahaja Yogis when they just
enter into a house
immediately everyone feels it. Everyone
can feel it that somebody has come.
Immediately the whole thing cools down
in no time. Somebody has come.
There are some here also, not that there
are none, but they are few people.
You have to blow out vibrations otherwise
you are just a liability to yourself.
Why don’t you blow out vibrations? Because
you don’t feel responsible.
In your day-to-day life, morning till
evening, you have to see
that you develop this instrument of
responsibility within you,
otherwise the vibrations won’t flow
because, the main reason is
that our nervous system comes to us through
our Right Side.
Our nervous system is built up by our
Right Side.
All the elements within us have built [it]
up. If the elements are weakened,
if the chakras which are made by these
elements —
as you know all these chakras are made
by elements —
if the pot is weak, nothing is going
to work out.
You should be able to hold that water
of love
or you can say the water of bliss
and should be able to pour it out
to others.
Unless and until you are able to do that,
Sahaja Yoga won’t spread.
It will spread very slowly.
This is the difference, I feel, between
English and Australians,
that the quality of mind is thousands times
better than Australians.
They are not scholars. I found very few
people there who are even graduates.
Here everybody is a PhD or maybe a ‘MAD’:
but they are all very well educated.
Despite all that, Sahaj Yoga does not
spread out, why?
The reason is the quality of mind is good
but the action is extremely poor,
because you are exhausted, tired, you are
fighting in the mind.
You are not doing anything by which you
blow it out.
The Right Side is what you call the
Brahma’s, Brahmadeva’s, creation
and the Brahma Shakti as they call it.
This is the power of Brahma which is
flowing through you.
Wec all it the power of the Spirit.
It’s true, but the Spirit, the power
of the Spirit,
flows on your central nervous system.
If there is the electricity all stored up
here and there are very weak wires
what can you do with all that stored up
energy?
The wires have to be improved and for
this wire
your Right Side has to be improved
immensely.
Every minute you have to be responsible,
and this is what is lacking.
Then I find when some people who are
responsible, they feel extremely hurt
and they feel that they should really shout
and scream and should do something.
hey don’t know that these are really
the saints, they are realised souls.
They are great people, no doubt, but their
Right Side is weakened.
But that is not a great thing to accept,
it’s a very bad thing.
But that doesn’t mean you should feel
guilty — again, I am saying.
Because very nice! This is the way we
manage: is to feel guilty.
Because feeling guilty is the best way,
“I’m sorry, I’m sorry.
I should have done it. I know, I know,
I know!” — finished!
Then how can you improve? If you have
a pouch here
filled up (of guilt in Left Vishuddhi) all
the time with responsibility denied,
all the junk you have created out of that,
you are pushing into that pouch
and then you say, “Yes, yes, I know,
I should not have done it!”
Now what can you do? As a Mother
you can’t say,
“You hang yourself by the nearest tree!”
What do I do?
But I just look at you flabbergasted,
I said, “Really?”
He said: “Yes, I should have done but
I haven’t done it.”
For example, I tell somebody you’d better
cook for ten people, they are coming. (...)
That’s how you are at a standstill and you
really don’t know how to deal with them!
The point is: in all this talking of Spirit
and God,
one has to know [that] the vehicle has
to be better.
The vehicle is so very poor that it cannot
carry:
otherwise you will emit vibrations like
this. I know you can.
Wherever you will stand you’ll attract
people.
People must gather round you! You will
be amazed,
I went to Australia for how many months?
At the most a month or so, and I came back
from there:
already seven centres have started
and every centre has got at least three
hundred regular people coming!
It is not to feel guilty: I am not saying
[for that],
but to awaken yourself, to arise to this
point,
to be elated with understanding that you
have to rise up to that point
and that you have to take up that position
because you are the warriors of Truth.
You are the people who are seekers, you
have been for ages,
and you have no business to be
irresponsible and you have to do it.
It is my earnest desire that you understand
what I am saying.
Just sitting, meditating, putting hands
towards me
or towards the photograph is not
everything.
You are still receiving. You are still
at a receiving end.
You have to be on the giving end. How
will you do it?
You get so many vibrations sometimes
that you cannot feel after some time,
it’s so filled, the pitcher is so much
filled.
But what about pouring it out? Why you
cannot pour it out?
The reason is that the vehicle within you,
which is the Right Side, is the Pingala
Nadi, is out of gear.
And this is what one has to understand.
That can be built up only when you know
about Shri Rama’s life, the way He led
His life.
Every minute of His life was dynamic.
Not a single minute He wasted in life.
Every minute, whether He was in the forest
or…
He went to a place with His wife when He
was in exile,
and there — He knew His wife was a very
shy lady
and She would not take Her bath in
the open.
So there’s a rock which is completely
honed out,
such a big rock honed out, can you imagine?
(a place called Sitanani near Rahuri)
Inside, there is a water tap sort of
a thing coming out,
there’s a water coming out. So there’s
a stone here,
stone here, stone there, and at the end
of it there’s an opening
so that there’s light coming from this side
and light coming from this side.
But inside [if] you go, nobody can see you.
There are trees with which it is hidden.
There are trees which are called as
shikakai (used as hair shampoo)
means that’s a kind of a soap giving trees,
are created by Him for His wife.
Anywhere He lived He created a new
dimension,
a new house, a new style of life.
Of course He was an incarnation you can
say.
But He is your ideal and not those people
who sit out for hours together
drinking something and thinking they are
great martyrs.
I see all of them sitting near our church
here
and one of them was asked by someone
who was passing by,
“What are you doing?” “We are killing
ourselves!”
Very proudly saying that! I mean I just
don’t understand,
what business have they got to kill
themselves?
How much time it has taken God to create
them?
And here they are sitting and proudly
telling that, “We are killing ourselves!”
This is the situation in which I suddenly
find myself.
So I ask you what should I do? How should
I do?
You have to feel responsible in every way
of life.
But you do not think that there is anything
wrong
if you are a hanky-panky person.
If your feathers are falling everywhere
[you think] it’s all right!
To you it does not matter, but to
the Divine it does.
That means a person cannot convey
the message of God,
cannot communicate the bliss of God,
cannot pour that love.
We have to become very responsible
in everyday life,
I am not saying that [only] in Sahaja Yoga,
but in everyday life,
how you live, what you do. Are you only
worried about yourself
or are you worried about others? Are you
responsible for others?
I mean the modern style is not even to wish
good morning —
is regarded bad manners.
You see, it is bad manners even to open
door to someone, is bad manners,
they think it is slavish. I mean, all
manners and all those things,
all responsibility, seems to be [regarded
as] slavish.
And this kind of these modern ideas that
are floating in the air,
you should throw them away!
And you have to be human beings of a very
great quality.
You have to be people who have created
new worlds.
You are going to create that, I know.
You have to just rise up to that point and
not to sink into your guilts
and say, “Oh God, what we have been
doing?” No!
Awaken and arise and get it what you have
to do.
That’s what I feel about England.
England is so great and it’s the heart,
it’s the heart.
And look at the condition of the heart!
Your heart is so weak, there’s no heart
to anything.
All right, you love me and I love you,
but what about you loving others? And
loving other things?
Loving doesn’t mean writing love letters.
Doing something about it!
And that’s what, the doing something is
missing and lacking.
And that’s what we have to build up our
Right Side properly, into proper shape.
If we have to really do the cooking
we have to know how to light the fire
within us
and not to sit down and worry how to do it.
It is a very great thing to come to
England for me, really, for one reason
that this is the place where Sahaj Yoga
is going to work out.
It is going to circulate in the whole
world, I know, through you people.
But if you do not improve the communication
wires of yours
it will completely stagnate, and the
responsibility of this stagnation
will be on you the Sahaja Yogis of London,
because you did not put your life together,
that’s why it did not work out.
It’s a tremendous responsibility.
Of course, to be responsible is wrong for
wrong things
but not to be responsible for Divine work,
when God has blessed you with
Self-realisation,
is absolutely against God, against your
Self, against Sahaj Yoga.
The other personality which I was talking
about is Shri Hanumana.
Shri Hanumana is such a great powerful
personality
about whom I did not tell you.
That, I mean, Rama once, you see, His
brother was hit by an arrow.
And Rama told Hanumana, that, “Why don’t
you go
and get a particular type of a medicine
for him
and you get it on a particular mountain,
so you go and get that particular thing.”
So he had a power, he had nine powers,
navadha shaktis he had, nine powers:
by which he could become small, he could
become big
and He could lift anything. He had lots
of powers like that,
so nine powers: anima, laghima, garima,
like that.
He could become so heavy that nobody could
lift him (garima).
I mean these are the powers he’s got
of the right hand side.
And so he went down to that mountain
and he couldn’t see that anywhere, he just
couldn’t see.
He said, “Why not take the whole mountain?”
He took the whole mountain on himself and
he brought it to Rama
and he said, “Now you select whichever
you like!”
He could have come back and said, “Oh,
I can’t find!
I am sorry, I know, I have been useless!”
If he was an Englishman!
But he said, “All right, if you want!”
He brought the whole mountain,
“Now come along, have it!” In every way
of his life,
you see his sense of responsibility and how
He carries on.
For example, he was sent to Ravana
and he was asked by Ravana, he told him
that,
“You cannot stay in this place, why did you
come here?”
Actually, first he went to Sita and told
Her that,
“Shri Rama had sent me,” and he showed
the ring,
and She recognised that was the ring
of Her husband.
And he said, “Mother if you want, I can
take you on my back.”
But She said, “No. Already I am a woman
who has come with another man.
You [I?] don’t want to have another bad
name and you’ll have a bad name,
so I will not come. So it’s all right.
You can go back and tell Rama that I am
all right.
‘You as a husband, come and fight this man.
Otherwise I’m not going to come with you.”
So then he was caught up and taken
to Ravana.
Now Ravana said that, “You are a monkey
and what have you come to do it?”
He said that, “You’d better release His
wife of Shri Rama
and He is such and such.”
So He said that, “You monkey, you are
telling me these things?”
“All right,” they said, “burn his tail.”
He said, “If they burn my tail, I know how
to use!”
He knows how the responsibility of the tail
is!
He started burning the whole of Lanka with
his tail
and he could have said that, “All right,
he’s burnt my thing,
I’d better run away! Why to do such
a thing?
You know, better avoid, get out, so
forget it!
I’m not going to go to Rama, he’s burnt
my thing,
tomorrow he will do something else.”
[Instead] he burnt the whole of Lanka,
the whole of it he burnt
till Ravana had to say, that, “Please
forgive and go away.”
He did all kinds of tricks to show that he
was really powerful.
His so many ways of his sense of
responsibility
and his dedication and love is expressed.
But, they say that, even if you take once
his name,
whatever work you want to do, it can be
done.
Any work that you want to be finished
will be done.
And his day is a Tuesday. On Tuesday,
if you request him for anything, he will
help you to do the work.
But it’s not like this that you sit down,
“Now come along Hanumana,
will you please do this job?”
But if you are doing the job, then he comes
to help you.
Means that he activates, he activates and
he makes your energy
flow into that direction that your work
is done.
He’s so helpful in so many ways that you
can’t imagine.
We have so many Sahaja Yogis have tried
it with them.
And he has created such miracles. Specially
the Australians,
somehow they have such a feeling for him,
I know the reason,
but they have such a feeling for him that
every time, anything happening,
they tell Hanumana, “Hanumana, now please
look after us!”
And they have told me that such miraculous
things have happened
since they have been using Shri Hanumana.
But you must have the vehicle to carry
this Hanumana!
He’s a very subtle Deity within you and if
you are irresponsible,
he hates such people, he hates, he just
can’t bear it.
He thinks they are absolutely useless
people!
He doesn’t pay attention to such people,
those who are not responsible.
They may give any excuses, they may
show off,
they may do anything, [but] he just doesn’t
care for such people.
He has no love, no respect, no attention
for the people who are not responsible.
There’s a very nice English saying, “God
helps those who help themselves.”
English language has so many beautiful
things in it,
all its nursery rhymes and everything.
I wish people would not just utter those
sayings but do it.
They listen to me but they don’t do it.
Now you have heard me today,
you should see how much responsible you
are.
Now we had our first ashram and if there
are others,
please excuse me, because it’s an open
thing and we have to talk about it.
And I was surprised that in our first
ashram, when I went there,
I was amazed! I mean, young people living
like pigs!
I couldn’t understand. I mean, they are
not hippies,
they are not taking any smokes, drinks,
or anything.
They are so irresponsible! They go
to the bathroom,
they come out as if a bull in a china shop
has entered!
And they really live like that, I was
amazed! How could they?
And they were all graduates, MADs, PhDs,
and everything.
I was wondering, “What has happened
to these people?”
Slowly, slowly they improved. But this lot
went away
then a new lot came in and a new lot
came in.
And it’s so surprising that once they
become responsible and good,
somehow or other Hanumana takes them out,
and they just get out of it.
Now, I have to tell you to determine today,
to decide,
that every moment and movement of your life
you are going to feel responsible as
Hanumana does.
Any work you tell Him: about Him it is said
that,
“Har kaarje karne ko, tat par.”
Means for doing any work, he is just ready!
He’s just ready!
You tell him anything, he’s just ready
to do it.
It is his quality that you should have.
And that quality is so much lacking today
in England.
All your strikes, all your problems can
be solved.
First time when I came, I was surprised,
I asked somebody,
“Are you working?” He said, “No, I am
successfully unemployed!”
I said, “Really? You are successfully
unemployed so how do you eat?”
“Oh, we get our doles.” “Oh really?”
“We have securities.”
What a security, it is nonsense, you are
parasite!
There is no self-respect. Leave alone
the respect of others,
there’s no self-respect. I was amazed!
Then I told them, “All of you have to take
to work.
Anybody who takes to doles is not going
to stay in the ashram.”
I wish your government can take some note
of it!
That we have to create responsible
citizens.
In England itself, we have to show that by
Sahaj Yoga you have turned the tables,
you have got smart people now, efficient,
responsible.
This is what we have to show. Once you
show this to others,
people will be amazed at it!
With other’s money [it’s] the same thing.
If you can get hold of somebody else’s
money that’s the best thing!
It’s a very common feature.
First time the Sahaja Yogis went to India
they came back here,
they never wrote a letter back, thanking
them. And I was amazed.
For six months, I said, “What are you
doing?”
“I know we should have written. I know
we should have written.”
“Then why? Why didn’t you write?”
No responsibility! What is this, I could
not understand.
Gradually they developed and developed
and developed. Now they feel.
But those who have started feeling are
the matured Sahaja Yogis I should say.
But others who are coming to it must know
that you have to have a sense
of responsibility.
Sometimes people who are realised have
a feeling,
“Oh, now we are realised! Now, nothing!
Settle down, have the bliss of Mother.
Sit down and enjoy it,”
Nothing doing! It will stop!
You have to be able to give this to others,
you should emit.
If you cannot emit those vibrations
yourself…
If you are enlightened, you should be able
to give light to others.
You can raise the Kundalini, all right, but
what about your own personality
which is so irresponsible? Which is nowhere
near Hanumana’s.
This Hanumana style of complete obedience
to your being,
the complete emission of that love that
you have received,
that Divine Power you have received.
Unless and until you achieve that state
you should not be satisfied with your
Self-realisation.
Self-realisation is only complete when you
yourself become the giver of light.
You the guru, you the great stars: that’s
my ambition.
I know I expect [a lot] sometimes from
my children.
And I want them to understand that I want
you to be really honoured
in the Kingdom of God as great sons
of your Mother.
May God bless you.
Left Side also, you know that, but keep
it up.
I do correct, by saying all these things.
I do awaken Hanumana and Shri Rama within
you, no doubt, I know that.
But keep them awake, keep them alert.
And you have to be alert and active,
responsible and respectable.
You have to realise that you are saints,
saints of a very special quality.
The saints who can give realisations
to others!
There have been not such saints, many,
before,
nor even today, there are saints who are
realised souls
but they don’t know how to give
realisation.
They don’t know so much. You have so much
of knowledge and everything,
except the vehicle is poor, it cannot carry
the bliss.
And the cup has to be all right otherwise
it cannot carry
the beautiful fountain of love that is
pouring down on this Earth.
And that is how you must know that, within
you this is awakened,
keep it awakened, keep it going.
Please close your eyes, [feet] straight
on the ground.
Put both the hands towards me like that.
Thoughts are gone now, there are no
thoughts.
So even if you want to feel guilty you
cannot.
There’s nothing to feel guilty. It is to
awaken
within yourself, that fire of Spirit,
that makes you express and emit.
We have to move very fast. We have
to achieve it very fast.
There isn’t much time left for us.
It’s easy to say that, “It’s rather
difficult,” and all that.
These things are not to be talked by us.
This is meant for some dramas and things.
It’s not for people who are chosen by God.
Just lift your hands a little bit and
you’ll feel it in the hands.
Better now? Right side opening very much!
Not to have any fright, nothing.
You know your Mother can never be angry
with you, never.
But I have to awaken them. That I love
you very much,
that I want you to have your due:
all the heralds and all the glory.
Close your eyes now and let it go, let it
flow.
See the responsibility of the Spirit is
so great.
Whatever may be your vehicle, once it is
awakened
it gives Realisation to others, it acts.
Be responsible like that Spirit.
If you become the Spirit you will be like
that Spirit.
Close your eyes. Just close your eyes.
By rising your Right Side only you can
really give balance to your Left Side:
otherwise there is no way out.
You just try to be responsible, you will be
amazed.
You just try to be responsible and you will
be amazed,
your all financial problems, all your
problems, will be solved,
because you are awakened!
And you have a special power.
You have to be just this power!
The responsibility becomes a heavenly power
within you.
Get the power from your heart.
Put your heart into it. Put your heart.
Put all these things into your heart:
“I have to do it from my heart!
I have to be responsible from my heart.
I have to be innately responsible.”